# Othello Practice Essay

---

# Contents

---

## Essay

### Introduction

What makes Shakespeare’s work engaging is the human complexity he weaves into his plays. This notion is explored in Shakespeare’s 1603 play Othello which explores and examines complex human experiences. Specifically, he reveals the tragic hero, Othello’s isolation from Venetian society, criticizes inconsistencies in human behaviors to depict a comprehensive picture of complex human complexities and the fragility of reputation.

### Isolation of Othello

Shakespeare engages us by thematically outlining human complexity through Othello’s social isolation in a painting of a pyramidal society with omnipresent class struggles which leads to his downfall. Implicit since the beginning, Iago’s covert insults toward Othello such as the zoomorphism “An old black ram topping your white ewe” highlights Venetia’s disapproval of interracial relationships, further isolating him. With reference to Axel Kruse’s 1990 analysis of Othello, Venetia’s acceptance of these pillars heightens “the predominant views held in England regarding those of racial difference”, immediately exposing Othello as different from others. Furthermore, the change in Othello’s language in the epanalepsis “if more thou dost perceive, let me know more” exemplifies Othello’s eager search for physical evidence to confirm his insecurity, which paves the path to his downfall and highlights the paradoxical nature of humans. Additionally, in Othello’s final soliloquy, Othello isolates himself by speaking in the third person “Man but a rush against Othello’s breast”. Additionally, the foreshadow of suicide “Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt” is an allusion to the butt of the rifle, a last resort of fighting when a soldier has run out of ammunition, suggesting Othello’s nakedness and vulnerability, emotions we have all experienced. Hence Shakespeare engages us by escalating the social isolation of Othello in a society bounded by omnipresent class struggles to highlight human complexities.

### Jealousy

In contrast to the theme above, Shakespeare engages us by highlighting jealousy to depict a comprehensive picture of human complexities, which can lead to the sufferance of others. Shakespeare’s intentions with this theme was to relate with the viewer by speaking their evil thoughts through the complicated characterization of Iago. For instance, critic E.K Chambers’ analysis identifies that “Iago’s dramatic function is that of the incarnation of evil”. Specifically, when Iago complains about Othello promoting Cassio instead of him even though “I am worth no worse a place”, his immediate characterization with an earmark of jealousy strokes a familiar emotion to the viewers. Appropriately, Iago’s revenge rampage against Othello with jealousy as a weapon while “practicing upon his peace and quiet”, indicates that Iago wants Othello to suffer as much as he does by tormenting Othello’s jealousy towards Desdemona. Hence, this notion highlights the human complexity that jealousy can lead to the sufferance of others. Ultimately, Iago confirms Othello downfall in the biblical allusion “proof of holy wit” - affirming that Othello will overestimate the handkerchief’s significance and play right into his hands, warning the viewers that jealousy can lead to irrational behavior to themselves and others around them. Therefore, Shakespeare engages the viewers by centering jealousy around the characterization of Iago to paint a comprehensive picture of human complexities.

### Fragility of Reputation

With some focus back to Othello, Shakespeare engages us by demonstrating human complexity through reputation - enabling and restricting certain characters to open doors for a tragic ending. Distinctively, in the situational irony, Desdemona who was “A maiden never bold” chose to restrict her own reputation by eloping with a man her father wouldn’t approve, which highlights the turbulence of individuals throughout the play. Furthermore, in the dramatic irony, reputation is seen to enable Iago to lurk as “A man he is of honesty and trust”, which places the burden of truth and Iago characterized as a double-edged sword exclusive to the audience. In contrast to Othello’s critical and rash phase, the biblical allusion in his final soliloquy, “Speak to me as I am” displays his poetic reversion and acceptance of loss of reputation, further cementing the oscillating human complexities in the play. Therefore, Shakespeare engages us by demonstrating human complexity through reputation - alternating character boundaries to open doors for a tragic ending.

### Conclusion

Thus, Shakespeare’s work Othello is engaging because of the human complexities he weaves into the plays and thematically outlines Othello’s isolation from society, inconsistencies in human behaviors and the fragility of reputation.